---
title: "Variables & Data Types"
lesson: 2
quizzes:
  - question: "Which of the following is a valid variable name?"
    options:
      - "2name"
      - "user-name"
      - "user_name"
      - "class"
    correct: 2
  - question: "What data type is the following value: \"hello\""
    options:
      - "int"
      - "float"
      - "str"
      - "bool"
    correct: 2
---

## Variables & Data Types

Variables aren't as scary as they sound, they're actually a very simple concept to understand. Think of a variable as a container in a factory, and that container has a name - that container is our variable. Now think of the shelf as a block (chunk) of memory where the container is held - that shelf is the memory within our program. That's it, that's what a variable is, a labeled container in a shelf which can hold items (values). These values have types, and in the previous lesson we mentioned two different data types, integers and strings.

> Primitive - refers to the use of basic data types and fundamental elements in a programming language that serve as the building blocks for more complex operations.

There are three types of data types, primitive, non-primitive, and user defined. Defined in the definition above, primitive refers to the basic data types that are essential for any program. User defined data types refers to data types defined by the programmer themself, in Python this is usually achieved by creating a class. Non-primitive data types refer to data structures such as lists, arrays, dictionaries - we'll talk about those later.

## Why, where and when?

If you're wondering why variables are a thing, it's because it was created to solve a problem, the problem of having no dynamic structure to retain data within a program. Your time spent as a programmer will mostly consist of writing hundreds of variables, this is not always a good thing though; which is why other _data structures_ have been implemented to combat this downside - which we'll go onto later.

#### When

> Literal - A notation for representing a fixed value directly in the source code, such as numbers, strings, or boolean values.

When it's suitable to use a variable depends on the complexity of a program. In the previous lesson we learnt about the `print` function, this was a single statement program, the simplest program. We did not need to define the text we wanted to print as a variable, we just used the **literal** value as the argument. With this said, we can start thinking about variables when we want to dynamically change values but keep it in one place - read below for it to make more sense.

```python
name = "john"           # We define a new variable labeled name with the value "john" (string)
print("hello " + name)  # We print and concat (add) the string "hello " and the variable name.
print("bye " + name)    # We do the same, but we've changed the first string to "bye "
```

If we run this code, we'll get this output:
```
hello john
bye john
```

You notice how the value `john` is being used in both `print` calls? That's because it belongs to the `name` variable, it's value. This demonstrates how useful variables are, we can dynamically reuse values and mutate (change) them wherever we like.

Let's break down how a variable is written, first you will define the name of the variable, this is initiated by an alphabetical character, and led by alphanumeric characters - this means it can only start with a letter, and then led by letters and numbers. You can also use `_` for variable names.

> Remember - variable name's cannot start with number.

## Primitive Types

As mentioned before, primitive types are types which are basic data types and fundamental elements in a programming language that serve as the building blocks for more complex operations. But what are they exactly?

> Mutable - something which can be changed.

> Immutable - something which cannot be changed.

In Python, there are several primitive types built in:
* `int` - integers (these are whole numbers e.g 245)
* `float` - floating-point numbers (decimals)
* `complex` - complex numbers (3 + 4j)
* `bool` - True or False
* `NoneType` - used to represent a null value (no value, can be used via `None`)
* `str` - strings (text)

Advanced data types:

* `bytes` - an immutable sequence of bytes (almost like a string internally)
* `bytearray` - a mutable sequence of bytes

You don't need to fully understand all of these data types as of now, but it's good to know they exist. We'll be focusing on the data types: `int`, `float`, `bool`, and `str`, as these are the most commonly used data types.

Using these data types are straight forward, you've already encountered both `int` and `str`, both represented by their **literal**, but how do we use a `bool` and `float`; just like the other two data types they have their own representation. Read below for an example.

We are going to calculate the area of a circle, let radius be `5.5`:
```python
PI = 3.14159    # Define the PI constant value

radius = 5.5    # Define the radius as a float value
area = PI * (radius * radius)

print(area)     # Print the area to the console
```

In this example, we have two demonstrations of the `float` data type being used, `PI` is implicitly defined as a float from the notation of the decimal points in the literal; the same goes for the `radius` variable. And finally, we calculate the area and print to the console.

We'll go more into depth on the `bool` data type in the `Conditional Statements` lesson as `bool` is used everywhere in conditional statements, but for now just remember it represents a truthy value, `true` or `false`.

## Naming Conventions

> Naming conventions - standardized rules that dictate how variables should be named in programming to enhance code readability and maintainability.

Naming conventions are important not just for yourself, but others. Yeah maybe other people might not read your code, but it's important to make this a habit, and that habit is ensuring your naming your variables with descriptive names.
For example, if you looked at the variable `foo = True`, would you know what it's used for? No, it's impossible to tell what this variable is going to dictate within the programs logic, which is why it's important to use descriptive variable names, let's ammend that code snippet to something more meaningful; `game_started = True`. Now this is more clear, we know this variable controls the games state.

You might've seen plain text being added to code, initiated with a #, this is called a comment, as it allows you to annotate lines of code or write descriptions about certain parts of your program, it can be used for anything.

## Practice Challenges

1. Create variables for a person's complete profile (name, age, height, is_employed), think about what data types you'll use.
2. Store information about your favorite book (title, author, pages, is_fiction)
3. Define variables for a simple calculator (first_number, second_number, operation)

## Key Concepts

1. Primitive data types are the basic types defined in most programming languages.
2. Strings hold plain text which are enclosed between quotes.
3. Integers hold whole numbers.
4. Floats hold numbers with decimal precision.
5. Booleans represent truthy values: true or false.
6. Naming conventions ensure readable and maintainable code.
