---
title: "Syntax"
lesson: 3
quizzes:
  - question: "What happens when you violate the rules of the syntax in Python?"
    options:
      - "The program runs fine."
      - "The program will error."
      - "The program will run but not output the expected result."
    correct: 1
  - question: "What is a statement."
    options:
      - "A line of code which instructs the computer to perform a specific action"
      - "A set of rules that dictate how code is structured"
      - "Plain text that references a variable or function"
      - "A mathematical operation like 2 + 2"
    correct: 0
  - question: "What does Python expect immediately after finding a left parenthesis '(' in a call statement?"
    options:
      - "Another left parenthesis"
      - "An identifier"
      - "The call arguments"
      - "A right parenthesis"
      - "Both C & D"
    correct: 4
---

# Syntax

> Syntax - a set of rules that dictate how code is structured and formatted in a programming language.

Syntax of a programming language governs how the programmer should write code within that language, such as validity of a certain expression - but let's go into more depth.

In Python, your program consists of statements, statements are lines of code that instructs the computer to perform a specific action, like we covered in the lessons before; variable declarations `name = "john"` are statements, same as assigning variables `name = "bob"`, and function calls `print("hi")`.

Additionally, statements are built upon `expressions`, this is a core fundamental of the syntax of a language. An `expression` can refer to multiple things in a language, in Python an expression can look like this: `name`, this is a reference to a variable (an expression), another expression can be any arithmetic operations: `2 + 2`, this is an expression.

## Statements under the hood

Let's take the `call` statement for this example. The call statement consist of the `name` of the function you want to call, and the `list of arguments`. We need to remember it's in this order, else our program will fail and error with a `SyntaxError`. Let's break the `call` statement down.

First, Python expects an `identifier`, an `identifier` is nothing but plain text, it could reference a `variable` or `function`, afterwards if Python finds a left parenthesis `(` it'll know it's a `call` statement, and then it'll expect the call `arguments`, arguments can consist of both `expressions` and `statements`, but let's focus on `expressions` for now. In our second lesson, we talked about `literals`, such as `numbers` and `strings`; these literals fall under the `expression` structure, and we can directly pass them into our arguments list. Finally, Python will expect an enclosing right parenthesis `)` to close in the arguments.

If this sounded like too much, here is a visual representation on what Python does:

`Call Statement: "print" -> "(" -> "234" -> ")"`

This is equivalent to `print(234)`, and these are the rules we have to follow when writing Python code, it's also important to know that `call` statements don't always need to have a list of arguments, it can be **empty**.
A more familiar example of a statement can be a variable declaration statement:

`Variable Declaration: "name" -> "=" -> "bob"`

This is equivalent to `name = "bob"`, once you're familiar with how syntax works, reading and debugging code will become second nature.
